下のチャート（図1）を見てみると、オレンジと黒のバーが並んでいて、2016年には大きな伸びが認められます。キャプションを確かめれば、このチャートが破壊された建物数とイスラエルの住宅解体政策の影響を受けた人々を示していることが分かります。
Flowing Dataの著者、ネイサン・ヤウが言うように、「データは現実の生活を抽象化したものである」。それぞれの数字は家族を、またストーリーを語っています。
Broken Homesは、50年間イスラエルに占領されてきたパレスチナの東エルサレムで進行する住宅解体を追跡する、これまでで最も包括的なプロジェクトです。
アルジャジーラは国連と密接に協力して、2016年に東エルサレムで行われた家の解体工事をすべて追跡しました。190の建造物が破壊され、1200人以上のパレスチナ人が避難したり、影響を受けたりした記録的な年であることが判明しました。
私たちは2015年末にイスラエル人とパレスチナ人の間で暴力がエスカレートしているのを目の当たりにしてから、このプロジェクトに取り組むことにしました。
その目的は、イスラエルの住宅解体政策が緊張の高まりによってどのような影響を受けるのかを理解することと、データに隠された人々の物語を読者に伝えることの二つでした。
このプロジェクトは、ビデオ証言、360度の写真、そしてそれぞれの解体が行われた場所、頻度、影響をハイライトするインタラクティブな地図を通して、パレスチナの家庭への影響を明らかにしています。


Our producer in Doha began coordinating with the UN in late 2015 to develop a framework for the project. The UN routinely gathers data on home demolitions, and while some of it is available online, other aspects - including GPS coordinates - are only recorded internally. We wanted to be able to show every demolition site on a map, so we began obtaining monthly data sets from the UN. For each incident, we included the demolition date, number of people and structures affected, a brief description of what happened, and a point on our East Jerusalem map showing the location. We cross-checked these with news reports and other local information about home demolitions. We then selected a case to highlight each month, as a way of showing different facets of the Israeli policy - from punitive to administrative demolitions, affecting everyone from young children to elderly residents.

Our reporter on the ground travelled throughout East Jerusalem over the course of the year to speak with many of the affected families, in order to explore their losses in greater depth and to photograph and record the demolition sites.

There was a broad range of responses from the affected families. The interviews had to take place in the physical location of the demolition, which could be a difficult experience for those affected, so sensitivity and patience was required at all stages, from setting up the meetings to recording the material.

On the whole, the families responded well to the project. They were very generous with their time and in sharing their experiences. In one instance, a man had written down a list of things he wanted to say to us. In another case, it took a few attempts to convince the family to take part. One family declined to meet with us and so we had to liaise with the UN and find another family willing to speak about their home demolition.

Many news organisations, including Al Jazeera, have reported on individual home demolitions over the years. One of the main reasons for taking a data-driven approach this time was to clearly contextualise the scale of the story by counting each and every demolition. This context and fresh perspective is especially important when reporting on an ongoing topic to keep readers engaged.

A word of advice for aspiring data journalists: taking a data-driven approach to a story doesn’t need to be technical or expensive. Sometimes just following and counting occurrences of an event over time is enough to tell you a lot about the scale of a problem. As long as your data gathering methodology remains consistent, there are many stories that you can tell using data that you might not otherwise report on. Also, be patient. We gathered data for an entire year to tell this story. The most important thing is to thoroughly storyboard exactly what data you need before sending any reporters out into the field. Most of the time you won’t need any special equipment either. We used an iPhone to take all the 360 degree images and capture the specific GPS coordinates.

The project - released in January 2017 in English, Arabic and Bosnian - presents a grim warning about what lies ahead as Israel continues to deny building permits to 98 percent of Palestinian applicants, ramping up the pressure on a large and growing population.

Works Cited

Megan O’Toole et al., ‘Broken Homes: A Record Year of Home Demolitions in Occupied East Jerusalem’, Al Jazeera, 2017.

