データジャーナリズム、デジタル普遍主義と周縁部のイノベーション
Written by Anita Say Chan
概要
「デジタル普遍主義の神話」は、公的な物語や想像力をいわゆるイノベーションの「中心」に固定化する手段であるばかりではなく、そうした中心を超えたデジタルな力学への関心を同時にそぐ手段にも現れています
-データおよび周辺に対する植民地的関係を呼び起こす力学は、記者やグローバルデジタル文化の研究者たちが同じ轍を踏むことがあってはなりません。
キーワード：デジタルユニバーサリズム、中心、周縁、植民地関係、脱植民地コンピューティング、ローカルイノベーション
「デジタル普遍主義」とは、デジタルをめぐるグローバルな想像力を形成する広範な、しかし誤った枠組みのことで、イノベーションの「中心」が推進する単一の普遍的な物語が、今日世界中で進行中のデジタル開発の形態を正確に表現できると見なしています。
つまり、現代の「イノベーション」と技術デザインの中心が、大多数の「残りのデジタル住民」のために、世界に広がるデジタルの未来を決めているというのです。
そしてそれは、技術的変容、デジタル生産性とプラクティス、あるいは情報ベースの革新と探求を研究し観察するための最良で最も「正当な」場所は、そうした中心地であるという推定を通じて共鳴しているのです。
その最たるものが、シリコンバレーにあるラボやオフィス、研究施設、そして世界中のイノベーションの中心地に散在する、エリート層のデジタル専門知識を集結させた場所である。
デジタル文化はおそらくこのような中心地から生まれ、最も純粋な形と姿を持ちますが、それは他の場所では複製されるだけです。
また、最も正確な、あるいは理想的なデジタルの将来像のビジョンが生まれるのもこの場所であり、ここでは、技術の進歩、したがってデジタル文化の進歩は、最もダイナミックで生き生きとしていてインスピレーションに満ちていると考えられています。
言い換えれば、デジタル文化はそのユニークでグローバルな次元にもかかわらず、その研究を行い、そのダイナミクスを観察するための、より「本物」で生産的な場所を実際に持っていると仮定しているのです。
2000年代初頭以降、ペルーとラテンアメリカにおけるデジタル文化のアクティビズムと政策について研究し、執筆していた若い研究者として、それは私のその後に大きな影響を与えるものでありながら、最も日常的に耳にする、一見無邪気な質問でした。
「なぜ、デジタル文化を学ぶためにペルーやラテンアメリカに行くの？デジタル文化を研究するのに、もっと良い場所があるでしょう。シリコンバレーのような場所で活動を観察し、記録した方がいいのでは？」
こうした質問をする人は、ペルーは、かつてインカ文明の中心地であった南米の山岳地帯だとイメージしています。
マチュピチュ、アンデス山脈の高地、ケチュア語やアイマラ語を話す人々が多く住む、かつてインカ文明の中心地であった南米の山国を思い浮かべることでしょう。
過去の伝統や先住民の文化、あるいは豊かな自然を覗き見るには理想的な場所として知られているかもしれないが、現代のデジタル文化や高度なテクノロジーの流れ、あるいはそれらに関連する未来志向の開発については、ほとんど教えてくれないと考えられていました。
ペルーのような場所には、私たちが引き継ぐべき過去の技術の遺物や宝物が散らばっていて、シリコンバレーのような場所では、私たちがまだ見ぬ未来の技術の秘密がきっと明らかにされているのです。
背景に潜んでいるのは、エリートを輩出する中央で選ばれた技術者たちが想像するデジタルの未来は、世界の残りの部分を代弁することができ、現在イノベーションの中心地で展開されているのは、間違いなく周辺部の未来になっていくというカジュアルな確信です。


The power of the “myth of digital universalism” thus manifests not only in the means by which it keeps public narratives and imaginations fixed exclusively around established centres of innovation, but in the means by which it simultaneously discourages attention to digital dynamics beyond such centres. It therein narrows the diversity and global circulation of narratives around actual digital dynamics occurring across a range of locales, invisibilizes diverse forms of digital generativity, and artificially amplifies and reinforces a representation of “innovation” capitals as exclusive sites of digital productivity.

There is a particular colonial notion of the periphery conjured here that reporters and scholars of global digital cultures alike must be wary of reproducing: That is, of the “periphery” as mere agents of global counterfeit or zones of diffusion for a future invented prior and elsewhere. Indeed, the periphery is hardly so passive or uninventive. Lively and dynamic outdoor markets or Internet cafes filled with used, recycled and reassembled computers and parts are innovations of the Global South that extended low-cost Internet access and scaled out global and local media content circulation to diverse populations in rural and urban zones alike. These technological hacks and local improvisations are an everyday part of the periphery’s technology landscape whose vibrancy is only partly captured by comparing it to formalized commercial chains of digital goods or computer and Internet suppliers. As the social scientists Daniel Miller and Don Slater (2001) observed in their study of Trinidad, “the Internet is not a monolithic cyberspace,” but exists instead as a globally expansive technology with various local realities, adoptive practices and cultural politics that surround its varying localizations. There have been, indeed, more ways than one to imagine what digital practice and connection could look like.

In Peru, evidence of lively digital cultures that brought a range of distinct actors and interests into unexpected and often contradictory proximity was readily visible. Apparent collectives of free software advocates, who had helped to bring the first UN-sponsored conference on free software use in Latin America—a landmark event—to the ancient Incan capital of Cuzco in 2003, sought to reframe the adoption of open technologies. They sought to reframe it as not just an issue of individual liberty and free choice, as it had been for free/libre and open-source software (FLOSS) advocacy in the United States, but of cultural diversity, state transparency and political sovereignty from the monopolistic power of transnational corporations in the Global South.

“Digital innovation” classrooms installed in rural schools by the state would later be converted into the largest network of deployment sites for MIT’s high-profile One Laptop per Child (OLPC) initiative just several years later, all in the name of enabling universal digital inclusion. And intellectual property (IP) titles newly and aggressively applied by state programmes to “traditional” goods promised to convert rural producers and artisans into new classes of export-ready “information workers” as part of the nation’s growing information society-based initiatives.

FLOSS advocates and high-tech activists in Cuzco, state -promoted “innovation classrooms” in rural schools, and traditional artisans as new global “information workers” were not the conventional interests or protagonists that emerged from most tales spun in centres of digital culture. To watch their stories unfold was to watch the details of each spill over the edges of the existing frameworks and dominant narratives of digital culture. Global imaginaries around IT in the new millennium, after all, have made Silicon Valley hackers, the obsessions and aspirations of high-tech engineers, and the strategic enterprise of competitive technology entrepreneurs, the stuff of popular Hollywood films and obsessively followed Twitter accounts. These are a cast of increasingly recognizable actors, heroes and villains. But to capture the dynamic engagements and fraught experiments in digital culture in Peru requires attention to a host of other stakes, agents and developments—ones that in working around the digital tried to build new links and exchanges between spaces of the rural and the urban, the high-tech and the traditional, and distinct orientations around the global with intensive commitments to the local.

Data journalists today have a growing host of digital tools and technological resources to witness, capture and recall digital cultures and activities across a range of local sites around the world. Even before the wave of social protests in the Middle East starting in early 2011, networked digital media extended new global broadcast capabilities for movements that adopted strategic uses of social media in contexts as diverse as Mexico (Schulz, 2007), Iran (Burns & Eltham, 2009; Grossman, 2009), the Philippines (Uy-Tioco, 2003; Vicente, 2003) and Ukraine (Morozov, 2010).

In the wake of the 2011 Arab Spring—movements from Spain’s 15-M Indignados, to the North American Occupy, made strategic uses of hashtag organizing and activism on social media platforms. More recently, movements from the US-launched #MeToo and #BlackLivesMatter run alongside global mobilizations from Latin America’s #NiUnaMenos, to the Nigerian- launched #BringBackOurGirls, Australia’s #Sosblakaustralia, Canadian First Nations’ #IdleNoMore mobilizations and Hong Kong’s #UmbrellaRevolution.

The Umbrella Revolution in Hong Kong
The Umbrella Revolution took place in Hong Kong in 2014
Such movements’ expanding user-generated media streams multiply civic data practices and decentre the dominant applications of “big data” on social media platforms that bias towards forms of market-oriented profiling. They instead leverage data practices for new forms of narrative capacity that break from established centres of media and news production while lending their data archives—and online evidence of the global extensions of their publics—to geographically dispersed documentarians, reporters and organizers alike.

But the growth of digital resources and data repositories—from online “data” archives by social movements on social media platforms, to parallel forms of creative data activism—creates new risks for data journalists as well. Foremost among these is a risk from the seductive capacity of big data and social media platforms to leverage the abundance of data and informa- tion they collect as a means to convince audiences that their extensive data trackings compile and create the best possible form of documenting present human activity and social experience—as well as assessing and predicting the future of their political or economic ramifications.

The temporal presumptiveness of digital universalists’ projection that the forms of digital “present” cultivated in innovation centres today can and will accurately represent the digital futures of global peripheries finds a new complement in data industries’ self-assured claims for the predictive capacities of algorithmic data processing. Such pronouncements remain, even despite the evident contemporary failures of mainstream political data analysts, social media companies and news pundits in the West to accurately predict the major global political disruptions of recent years—from the 2016 US presidential election, to Brexit, to the Cambridge Analytica scandal, to the “surprise” rise of the alt-right movements across the West.

Today’s data journalists should be vigilantly wary of enabling data tracings and archives—regardless of how extensive and impressively large they may be—to serve as the sole or dominant form of documenting, speaking for and assessing the diverse forms of social realities that the public relies on them to channel. Parallel with growing calls from Latin American and postcolonial scholars for broadening research and documentation methods to expand what and who represents information, technology and new media cultures under a “decolonial computing” framework (Chan, 2018), data journalists critical of digital universalist frameworks should aim too to consciously diversify data sources and decentre methods that would privilege “big data” as the exclusive or most legitimate key to mapping empirical events and social realities. Moves towards a “decolonization of knowledge” underscore the significance of the diverse ways through which citizens and researchers in the Global South are engaging in bottom-up data practices.1 These practices leverage an emphasis on community practices and human-centred means of assessing and interpreting data—for social change, as well as speaking for the resistances to uses of big data that increase oppression, inequality and social harm.

Data journalists critical of digital universalism’s new extensions in data universalism should take heart to find allies and resonant concerns for developing accountable and responsible data practices with scholars in critical data studies, algorithm studies, software and platform studies, and postcolonial computing. This includes a reinforced rejection of data fundamentalism (Boyd & Crawford, 2012) and technological determinism that still surrounds mainstream accounts of algorithms in application. It also entails a fundamental recentring of the human within datafied worlds and data industries—that resists the urge to read big data and “algorithms as fetishized objects . . . and firmly resist[s] putting the technology in the explanatory driver’s seat” (Crawford, 2016). It also involves treating data infrastructures and the underlying algorithms that give political life to them intentionally as both ambiguous and approachable—to develop methodologies that not only explore new empirical and everyday settings for data politics—whether airport security, credit scoring, hospital and patient tracking, or social media across a diversity of global sites—but also find creative ways to make data productive for analysis (Gillespie, 2013; Ziewitz, 2016).

Finally, it is perhaps worth a reminder that conserving the given centres of digital innovation as the exclusive sites of digital invention or the making of data futures, of course, also neglects another crucial detail—that the centres of the present were once on the periphery, too. To focus on centres as inventing models that simply come to be adopted and copied elsewhere presumes the perfect, continual extension of replicative functions and forces. It fails to account for the possibility of change within the larger system—the destabilizations and realignments of prior centres—and so, too, the realignments of prior peripheries.

The “surprise” of the 2011 Arab Spring and its influence across a range of global sites in the West and non-West like, much like the recent rise of non-Western digital markets and economic competitors in nations labelled “developing” less than two decades ago, and the destabilization of powerful Western democracies today, are reminders that the stability of established powers and the permanence of centre–periphery relations can questioned. Far from merely lagging behind or mimicking centres, dynamic activities from the periphery suggest how agents once holding minor status can emerge instead as fresh sources of distinct productivity. Their diverse threads unsettle the unspoken presumption that a single, universal narrative could adequately represent the distinct digital futures and imaginaries emerging across a range of local sites today.

Footnotes

1. For more on this see Kukutai and Walter’s chapter in this book.

Works Cited

Boyd, D., & Crawford, K. (2012). Critical questions for big data. Information, Communication & Society, 15(5), 662–679. doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2012.678878

Burns, A., & Eltham, B. (2009). Twitter free Iran: An evaluation of Twitter’s role in public diplomacy and information operations in Iran’s 2009 election crisis. In P. Franco & M. Armstrong (Eds.), Record of the Communications Policy & Research Forum 2009 (pp. 322–334). Network Insight Institute.

Chan, A. (2018). Decolonial computing and networking beyond digital universalism. Catalyst, 4(2). doi.org/10.28968/cftt.v4i2.29844

Crawford, K. (2016). Can an algorithm be agonistic? Ten scenes from life in cal- culated publics. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 41(1), 77–92. doi.org/10.1177/0162243915589635

Gillespie, T. (2013). The relevance of algorithms. In T. Gillespie, P. J. Boczkowski, & K. A. Foot (Eds.), Media technologies: Essays on communication, materiality, and society (pp. 167–193). MIT Press.

Grossman, L. (2009, June 17). Iran’s protests: Why Twitter is the medium of the movement. Time. content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1905125,00.html

Miller, D., & Slater, D. (2001). The Internet: An ethnographic approach. Berg Publishers.

Morozov, E. (2010). The net delusion: The dark side of Internet freedom. Public Affairs.

Schulz, M. (2007). The role of the Internet in transnational mobilization: A case studyof the Zapatista movement, 1994–2005. In M. Herkenrath (Ed.), Civil society: Local and regional responses to global challenges (pp. 129–156). Transaction Publishers.

Uy-Tioco, C. (2003, October 11). The cell phone and EDSA 2: The role of a com- munication technology in ousting a president. Critical Themes in Media Studies Conference.

Vicente, R. (2003). The cell phone and the crowd: Messianic politics in the contemporary Philippines. Public Culture, 24(47), 3–36. doi.org/10.1080/01154451.2003.9754246

Ziewitz, M. (2016). Governing algorithms: Myth, mess, and methods. Science,Technology, & Human Values, 41(1), 3–16. doi.org/10.1177/0162243915608948
