インパクトを有するデータジャーナリズム
Written by: Paul Bradshaw
概要
インパクトを有するデータジャーナリズム：インパクトの測定方法と理由、インパクトの変化、そしてインパクトを形成する要因。
キーワード：インパクト、エンゲージメント、データジャーナリズム、アナリティクス、調査報道、データ品質
ボストン・グローブ紙が児童虐待をめぐる（教会）組織の沈黙を調査した映画『スポットライト』（2015）をまだ見ていないなら、今すぐご覧ください。
さらにいえば、最後に出てくるタイトルカードまでしっかり見るべきです。
スクリーンの下にリストが表示されは、ナイジェリアのアキュテからオーストラリアのウーロンゴンまで、この映画以降に虐待が発覚した何十もの場所が詳述されます。
しかし、このタイトルカードは、私たちに祝福の気持ちを一旦立ち止まらせるものでもある。
スキャンダルに関わった重要人物の一人が、"世界で最も高い地位にあるローマカトリック教会の一つ "に配置換えになったと書かれているのです。
これこそ、データジャーナリズムにおけるインパクトの課題です。
問題の認知度を高めることが「インパクト」なのか？そのストーリーは、罰や報酬をもたらす必要があるのだろうか？目に見える政策変更か？インパクトはどの程度重要なのか？そして、誰にとって？
この最後の2つの疑問は、最初に取り組む価値があります。従来、インパクトが重要視されてきたのは、主に2つの理由からでした。商業的な理由と文化的な理由です。
商業的には、ブランドの認知度や高い視聴者数といったインパクトの尺度は、広告（価格と量の両方を上げる）や購読・コピー販売を通じて出版社の利益率に直接貢献することができます（Rusbridger, 2018）。
一方、文化的には、インパクトのあるストーリーは、報道機関や個々のジャーナリストに仲間内で「自慢できる権利」を与えてもきました。両者は、これから見るように、より複雑になってきています。
ジャーナリズムにおけるインパクトの測定は、歴史的にみて限られています。利用できるのは、売上や視聴者数の集計、業界賞の限られたプール、そして時折行われる視聴者調査だけでした。
もちろん、現在では、測定基準の急増だけでなく、ビジネスモデルの急増も課題となっています。特に、非営利のニュース提供の拡大により、インパクトがますます重視され、その測定方法に関する議論が高まっています（Schlemmer、2016年）。
さらに、ストーリー単位でインパクトを測定できるようになったことで、視聴者へのインパクトに責任を負うのは、もはや編集者ではなく、ジャーナリストにもなっています。
数字で測るインパクトの大きさ
インパクトの最も簡単な尺度は、おそらくリーチ数でしょう。BBCの「70億人の人々とあなた:あなたの番号は?」のようなデータ駆動型のインタラクティブコンテンツは、何百万人もの読者を話題の記事に引き込みました。
2012年のある時点で、ネイト・シルバーのデータ・ジャーナリズムは、ニューヨーク・タイムズの閲覧数の５分の１に一人に達していました。
このような粗雑な指標を嘲笑する人もいるかもしれませんが、これは重要なことです。
かつて、ジャーナリストが読者をないがしろにして仲間に感銘を与えようとしていると批判されたことがあったとしても、現代のジャーナリズムは、少なくとも、読者とつながりを持てることを証明することが期待されています。
ほとんどの場合、この証明は広告主のために必要ですが、BBCのような公的資金によるユニバーサル・ニュース・プロバイダーでさえ、資金調達の要件を満たしていることを証明するために必要なのです。
エンゲージメントは、リーチのより高度な関係であり、ここでもデータジャーナリズムはうまく機能しています。
例えば、ある新聞社Reachの編集者会議では、ページにデータビジュアライゼーションを追加するだけで、滞在時間が3分の1増えることが明らかにされました。
データ駆動型のインタラクティビティは、退屈なテーマを一変させます。
同社のデヴィッド・ハイガソン氏は、データチームが貧困の統計に基づいたインタラクティブなウィジェットに20万人以上の人々が自分の郵便番号を入力したことを指摘し、「単純な『データが教えてくれる系』の話からは想像もつかないほど」（Higgerson、2015）数の人が参加したと述べている。
エンゲージメントは、広告に依存する組織にとって特に重要である（エンゲージメントの高いところでは料金を上げることができる）が、購読、寄付、イベントが重要な組織にとっても重要である：これらもエンゲージメントと結びつく傾向がある。
非営利団体の資金提供や助成金の拡大には、単にリーチするだけでなく、インパクトをモニタリングしたり、実証したりすることが明確に求められている場合が多い。特に、政治的、法的な変化や行動がしばしば言及される。
例えば、国際調査報道ジャーナリスト連合 (ICIJ) は、パナマ文書の調査報道を、ピュリッツァー賞を含む約20の賞を受賞するという、より伝統的な評価基準と並んで、「少なくとも150件の照会、監査または調査につながったとして評価しています。
イギリスでは、データジャーナリズムの歴史において、国会議員の経費スキャンダルが特別な位置を占めています。これは、テレグラフ紙が数週間にわたってニュースアジェンダをリードしただけでなく、新しい組織の設立につながった。
IPSA（Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority：独立議会基準局）です。この団体は現在、政治家の経費請求に関するオープンデータを公表しており、政治家の説明責任を果たすことを可能にし、さらなるデータジャーナリズムにつながるものとなっています。
しかし、政策は政治よりもはるかに広い範囲に及ぶことがあります。銀行の融資政策は何百万人もの人々に影響を与えます。
1980年代後半、米国ではビル・デドマンがピューリッツァー賞を受賞した一連の記事「Colour of Money」でその責任を追及したことは有名です。
データに基づく調査は、人種差別的な融資慣行（「レッドライニング」）を明らかにし、調査、新たな融資、訴訟、新しい法律の制定など、政治、金融、法律の変化にもつながりました。
30年後（の現在）、このアプローチの現代版を見ることができます。
ProPublicaの「Machine Bias」シリーズは、アルゴリズムによる説明責任に光を当て、Bureau Localはそのネットワークを利用して、ソーシャルメディア上のアルゴリズムでターゲット化された「ダーク広告」に関する情報をクラウドソーシングしています（McClenaghan, 2017）。
両者とも、Facebookの多くのポリシーの変更に貢献し、ProPublicaの手法は、ソーシャルネットワークに対する訴訟の基礎を確立する上で、公正住宅団体が採用しました（Angwin & Tobin, 2018; "Improving Enforcement and Promoting Diversity," 2017; Jalonick, 2017）。
警察の配置に影響を与えることから、非白人地域におけるウーバーの価格設定まで、アルゴリズムの政策が私たちの生活においてますます強力になるにつれ、これらの責任を問うことは、より伝統的な政治的形態の権力の責任を問うことと同様に重要になっています（Chammah, 2016; Stark, 2016）。

What is notable about some of these examples is that their impact relies upon—and is partly demonstrated by—collaboration with others. When the Bureau Local talk about impact, for example, they refer to the numbers of stories produced by members of its grassroots network, inspiring others to action, while the ICIJ lists the growing scale of its networks: “LuxLeaks (2014) involved more than 80 reporters in 26 countries. Swiss Leaks (2015) more than 140 reporters in 45 countries” (Cabra, 2017). The figure rises to more than 370 reporters in nearly 80 countries for the Panama Papers investigation: A hundred media organizations publishing 4,700 articles (Blau, 2016).

What is more, the data gathered and published as a result of investigations can become a source of impact itself: The Offshore Leaks database, the ICIJ points out, “is used regularly by academics, NGOs and tax agencies” (Cabra, 2017).

There is something notable about this shift from the pride of publishing to winning plaudits for acting as facilitators and organizers and database managers. As a result, collaboration has become a skill in itself: Many non-profit organizations have community or project management roles dedicated to building and maintaining relationships with contributors and partners, and journalism training increasingly reflects this shift, too.

Some of this can be traced back to the influence of early data journalism culture: Writing about the practice in Canada in 2016, Alfred Hermida and Mary Lynn Young (2017) noted “an evolving division of labor that prioritizes inter-organizational networked journalism relationships.” And the influence was recognized further in 2018 when the Reuters Institute published a book on the rise of collaborative journalism, noting that “collaboration can become a story in itself, further increasing the impact of the journalism” (Sambrook, 2018).

Changing What We Count, How We Count It and Whether We Get It Right

Advanced technical skills are not necessarily required to create a story with impact. One of the longest-running data journalism projects, the Bureau of Investigative Journalism’s “Drone Warfare” project, has been tracking US drone strikes for over five years.4 Its core methodology boils down to one word: Persistence.5

On a weekly basis Bureau reporters have turned “free text” reports into a structured data set that can be analyzed, searched and queried. That data—complemented by interviews with sources—has been used by NGOs and the Bureau has submitted written evidence to the UK Parliament’s Defence Committee.6

Counting the uncounted is a particularly important way that data journalism can make an impact—indeed, it is probably fair to say that it is data journalism’s equivalent of “giving a voice to the voiceless.” “The Migrants’ Files,” a project involving journalists from over 15 countries, was started after data journalists noted that there was “no usable database of people who died in their attempt to reach or stay in Europe” (The Migrants’ Files, n.d.). Its impact has been to force other agencies into action: The International Organization for Migration and others now collect their own data.

Even when a government appears to be counting something, it can be worth investigating. While working with the BBC England Data Unit on an investigation into the scale of library cuts, for example, I experienced a moment of panic when I saw that a question was being asked in Parliament for data about the issue (“Libraries Lose a Quarter of Staff as Hundreds Close,” 2016). Would the response scoop the months of work we had been doing? In fact, it didn’t—instead, it established that the government itself knew less than we did about the true scale of those cuts, because they hadn’t undertaken the depth of investigation that we had.

And sometimes the impact lies not in the mere existence of data, but in its representation: One project by the Mexican newspaper El Universal, “Ausencias Ignoradas” (Ignored absences), puts a face to over 4,500 women who have gone missing in the country in a decade (Crosas Batista, 2016). The data was there, but it hadn’t been broken down to a “human” level. Libération’s “Meurtres conjugaux, des vies derrière les chiffres” does the same thing for domestic murders of women, and Ceyda Ulukaya’s “Kadin Cinayetleri” project has mapped femicides in Turkey.7

When Data Is Bad: Impacting Data Quality
Some of my favourite projects as a data journalist have been those which highlighted, or led to the identification of, flawed or missing data. In 2016 the BBC England Data Unit looked at how many academy schools were following rules on transparency: We picked a random sample of a hundred academies and checked to see if they published a register of all their governors’ interests, as required by official rules. One in five academies failed to do so—and as a result the regulator Ofcom took action against those we’d identified (“Academy Schools Breach Transparency Rules,” 2016). But were they serious about ensuring this would continue? Returning to the story in later years would be important in establishing whether the impact was merely short-term, or more systemic.

Sometimes the impact of a data journalism project is a by-product—only identified when the story is ready and responses are being sought. When the Bureau Local appeared to find that 18 councils in England had nothing held over in their reserves to protect against financial uncertainty, and sought a response, it turned out the data was wrong. No one noticed the incorrect data, they reported. “Not the councils that compiled the figures, nor the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government, which vetted and then released [them]” (Davies, 2018). Their investigation has added to a growing campaign for local bodies to publish data more consistently, more openly and more accurately.

Impact Beyond Innovation
As data journalism has become more routine, and more integrated into ever-complex business models, its impact has shifted from the sphere of innovation to that of delivery. As data editor David Ottewell wrote of the distinction in 2018:

Innovation is getting data journalism on a front page. Delivery is getting it on the front page day after day. Innovation is building a snazzy interactive that allows readers to explore and understand an important issue. Delivery is doing that, and getting large numbers of people to actually use it; then building another one the next day, and another the day after that. (Ottewell, 2018)

Delivery is also, of course, about impact beyond our peers, beyond the “wow” factor of a striking dataviz or interactive map—on the real world. It may be immediate, obvious and measurable, or it may be slow-burning, under the radar and diffuse. Sometimes we can feel like we did not make a difference—as in the case of The Boston Globe’s Catholic priest—but change can take time: Reporting can sow the seeds of change, with results coming years or decades later. The Bureau Local and BBC do not know if council or schools data will be more reliable in future—but they do know that the spotlight is on both to improve.

Sometimes shining a spotlight and accepting that it is the responsibility of others to take action is all that journalism can do; sometimes it takes action itself, and campaigns for greater openness. To this data journalism adds the ability to force greater openness, or create the tools that make it possible for others to take action.

Ultimately, data journalism with impact can set the agenda. It reaches audiences that other journalism does not reach and engages them in ways that other journalism does not. It gives a voice to the voiceless and shines a light on information which would otherwise remain obscure. It holds data to account and speaks truth to its power.

Some of this impact is quantifiable, and some has been harder to measure—and any attempt to monitor impact should bear this in mind. But that does not mean that we should not try.

Footnotes

1. www.imdb.com/title/tt1895587...

2. www.bbc.com/news/world-15391515

3. http://powerreporting.com/colo...

4. www.thebureauinvestigates.com/projects/drone-war
5. www.thebureauinvestigates.com/explainers/our-methodology

6.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201314/cmselect/cmdfence/772/772vw08.htm


7. www.liberation.fr/apps/2018/02/meurtres-conjugaux-derriere-les-chiffres/ (French language), http://kadincinayetleri.org/ (Turkish language)

Works Cited

Academy schools breach transparency rules. (2016, November 18). BBC News.www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-37620007

Angwin, J., & Tobin, A. (2018, March 27). Fair housing groups sue Facebook for allowing discrimination in housing ads. ProPublica. www.propublica.org/article/facebook-fair-housing-lawsuit-ad-discrimination

Blau, U. (2016, April 6). How some 370 journalists in 80 countries made the Panama Papers happen. Nieman Reports. niemanreports.org/articles/how-some-370-journalists-in-80-countries-made-the-panama-papers-happen/

Byers, D. (2012, November 6). 20% of NYT visitors read 538. Politico. www.politico.com/com/blogs/media/2012/11/nate-silver-draws-of-nyt-traffic-148670.html.

Cabra, M. (2017, November 29). How ICIJ went from having no data team to being a tech-driven media organization. ICIJ. www.icij.org/inside-icij/2017/11/icij-went-no-data-team-tech-driven-media-organization/

Chammah, M. (2016, February 3). Policing the future. The Marshall Project. www.themarshallproject.org/2016/02/03/policing-the-future

Crosas Batista, M. (2016, June 22). How one Mexican data team uncovered the story of 4,000 missing women. Online Journalism Blog. onlinejournalismblog.com/2016/06/22/mexico-data-journalism-ausencias-ignoradas/

Davies, G. (2018, May 2). Inaccurate and unchecked: Problems with local coun- cil spending data. The Bureau of Investigative Journalism. www.thebureauinvestigates.com/blog/2018-05-02/inaccurate-and-unchecked-problems-with-local-council-spending-data

Fitzgibbon, W., & Díaz-Struck, E. (2016, December 1). Panama Papers have had historic global effects—And the impacts keep coming. ICIJ. /www.icij.org/investigations/panama-papers/20161201-global-impact/

Hermida, A., & Young, M. L. (2017). Finding the data unicorn. Digital Journalism,5(2), 159–176. doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2016.1162663

Higgerson, D. (2015, October 14). How audience metrics dispel the myth that read- ers don’t want to get involved with serious stories. David Higgerson. davidhiggerson.wordpress.com/2015/10/14/how-audience-metrics-dispel-the-myth-that-readers-dont-want-to-get-involved-with-serious-stories/

ICIJ’s awards. (n.d.). ICIJ.www.icij.org/about/awards/

Improving enforcement and promoting diversity: Updates to ads policies and tools. (2017, February 8). About Facebook. about.fb.com/news/2017/02/improving-enforcement-and-promoting-diversity-updates-to-ads-policies-and-tools/

Jalonick, M. C. (2017, October 27). Facebook vows more transparency over political ads. The Seattle Times. www.seattletimes.com/business/facebook-vows-more-transparency-over-political-ads/

Libraries lose a quarter of staff as hundreds close. (2016, March 29). BBC News. www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-35707956

McClenaghan, M. (2017, May 18). Campaigners target voters with Brexit “dark ads.” The Bureau of Investigative Journalism. www.thebureauinvestigates.com/stories/2017-05-18/campaigners-target-voters-brexit-dark-ads

The Migrants’ Files. (n.d.). www.themigrantsfiles.com/

Ottewell, D. (2018, March 28). The evolution of data journalism. Medium. towardsdatascience.com/the-evolution-of-data-journalism-1e4c2802bc3d

Rusbridger, A. (2018, August 31). Alan Rusbridger: Who broke the news? The Guardian. www.theguardian.com/news/2018/aug/31/alan-rusbridger-who-broke-the-news

Sambrook, R. (Ed.). (2018). Global teamwork: The rise of collaboration in investigativejournalism. Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism.

Schlemmer, C. (2016). Speed is not everything: How news agencies use audience metrics.Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/our-research/speed-not-everything-how-news-agencies-use-audience-metrics

Stark, J. (2016, May 2). Investigating Uber surge pricing: A data journalism case study. Global Investigative Journalism Network. gijn.org/2016/05/02/investigating-uber-surge-pricing-a-data-journalism-case-study/

